@c This is part of the GNU Mailutils manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2006, 2007, 2010
@c Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See file mailutils.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************

@smallexample
@code{/* Prefixes @emph{mu_authority_}, @emph{mu_ticket_}, and @emph{mu_wicket_} are reserved. */}
@code{#include <mailutils/auth.h>}

@end smallexample

There are many ways to authenticate to a server. To be flexible the
authentication process is provided by three objects @code{mu_authority_t},
@code{mu_ticket_t}, and @code{mu_wicket_t}. The @code{mu_authority_t} can implement
different protocol like APOP, MD5-AUTH, One Time Passwd, etc. By default
if a mailbox does not understand or know how to authenticate it falls back
to user/passwd authentication. The @code{mu_ticket_t} is a way for
Mailboxes and Mailers provide a way to authenticate when the URL does not
contain enough information. The default action is to call the function
@code{mu_authority_authenticate()} which will get the @emph{user} and @emph{passwd}
if not set, this function can be overridden by a custom method.

@c
@c Ticket
@c

@deftypefun  int mu_ticket_create (mu_ticket_t *, void *@var{owner})
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun void mu_ticket_destroy (mu_ticket_t *, void *@var{owner})
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun  int mu_ticket_set_destroy (mu_ticket_t, void (*) (mu_ticket_t), void *@var{owner})
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun void* mu_ticket_get_owner (mu_ticket_t)
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun  int mu_ticket_set_pop (mu_ticket_t, int (*@var{_pop}) (mu_ticket_t, url_t, const char *, char **), void *)
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun  int mu_ticket_pop (mu_ticket_t, url_t, const char *, char **)
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun  int mu_ticket_set_data (mu_ticket_t, void *, void *@var{owner})
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun  int mu_ticket_get_data (mu_ticket_t, void **)
@end deftypefun

@c
@c Authority
@c

@sp 1

@deftypefun  int mu_authority_create (mu_authority_t *, mu_ticket_t, void *)
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun void mu_authority_destroy (mu_authority_t *, void *)
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun void* mu_authority_get_owner (mu_authority_t)
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun  int mu_authority_set_ticket (mu_authority_t, mu_ticket_t)
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun  int mu_authority_get_ticket (mu_authority_t, mu_ticket_t *)
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun  int mu_authority_authenticate (mu_authority_t)
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun  int mu_authority_set_authenticate (mu_authority_t, int (*@var{_authenticate}) (mu_authority_t), void *)
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun  int mu_authority_create_null (mu_authority_t *@var{authority}, void *@var{owner})
@end deftypefun

@c
@c Wicket
@c

@sp 1

@deftypefun  int mu_wicket_create (mu_wicket_t *, const char *)
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun void mu_wicket_destroy (mu_wicket_t *)
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun  int mu_wicket_set_filename (mu_wicket_t, const char *)
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun  int mu_wicket_get_filename (mu_wicket_t, char *, size_t, size_t *)
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun  int mu_wicket_set_ticket (mu_wicket_t, int (*) (mu_wicket_t, const char *, const char *, mu_ticket_t *))
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun  int mu_wicket_get_ticket (mu_wicket_t, mu_ticket_t *, const char *, const char *)
@end deftypefun

@c
@c An example.
@c

@sp 1
A simple example of an authenticate function:

@smallexample
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>
#include <mailutils/auth.h>

int
my_authenticate (auth_t auth, char **user, char **passwd)
@{
  char u[128] = "";
  char p[128] = "";

  /* prompt the user name */
  printf ("User: ");
  fflush (stdout);
  fgets (u, sizeof (u), stdin);
  u[strlen (u) - 1] = '\0'; /* nuke the trailing NL */

  /* prompt the passwd */
  printf ("Passwd: "); fflush (stdout);
  echo_off ();
  fgets (p, sizeof(p), stdin);
  echo_on ();
  p[strlen (p) - 1] = '\0';

  /* duplicate */
  *user = strdup (u);
  *passwd = strdup (p);
  return 0;
@}
@end smallexample
