@c This is part of the GNU Mailutils manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2006, 2007, 2010
@c Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See file mailutils.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************

@smallexample
@code{/* Prefix @emph{mu_envelope_} is reserved. */}
@code{#include <mailutils/envelope.h>}
@end smallexample

@deftypefun  int mu_envelope_create (mu_envelope_t *, void *)
Primarily for internal use.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun void mu_envelope_destroy (mu_envelope_t *, void *)
Primarily for internal use.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun void* mu_envelope_get_owner (mu_envelope_t)
@end deftypefun

@c
@c ----------
@c

@deftypefun  int mu_envelope_sender (mu_envelope_t, char *, size_t, size_t *)
Get the address that this message was reportedly received from. This
would be the "mail from" argument if the message was delivered
or received via SMTP, for example.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun int mu_envelope_set_sender (mu_envelope_t, int (*@var{_sender}) (mu_envelope_t, char *, size_t, size_t *), void *)
Primarily for internal use. The implementation of @code{mu_envelope_t} depends
on the mailbox type, this allows the function which actually gets
the sender to be set by the creator of an @code{mu_envelope_t}.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun  int mu_envelope_date (mu_envelope_t, char *, size_t, size_t *)
Get the date that the message was delivered to the mailbox, in
something close to ANSI @code{ctime()} format: Mon Jul 05 13:08:27 1999.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun int mu_envelope_set_date (mu_envelope_t, int (*@var{_date}) (mu_envelope_t, char *, size_t, size_t *), void *)
Primarily for internal use. The implementation of @code{mu_envelope_t} depends
on the mailbox type, this allows the function which actually gets
the date to be set by the creator of an @code{mu_envelope_t}.
@end deftypefun
