@c This is part of the GNU Mailutils manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2006, 2007, 2010
@c Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See file mailutils.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************

@menu
* Folder::             Folder.
* Mailbox::            Mailbox.
* Mailer::             Protocol Used to Send Mail.
* Message::            Message.
* Envelope::           Envelope.
* Headers::            Headers.
* Body::               Body.
* Attribute::          Attribute.
* Stream::             Stream.
* Iterator::           Iterator.
* Authenticator::      Authenticator.
* Address::            Address.
* Locker::             Locker.
* URL::                Uniform Resource Locators.
* Parse822::           Parsing RFC 822 headers.
* Mailcap::            Parsing RFC 1524 file.
@end menu

Wherever the mail is and whatever format it is stored in, it is operated
upon using the same set of functions. To unified the C API,
GNU Mailutils offers a heteroclite set of objects that work in
aggregation to do operations on emails.
Each object does a specific task and delegates non-related tasks to others.
The object comes alive by specifying a @emph{URL} parameter when created,
it will indicate the storage format or protocol (POP3, IMAP4, MH, MAILDIR,
etc ..).

@smallexample
@group
                          mu_folder_t                  mu_url_t
  -/var/mail-    +- .. ->+-------------------+   +-->+------------+
 (  alain *-)-+  |       |   mu_url_t      *-|---+   |   port     |
  ----------  |  |       |-------------------|       |   hostname |
 (  jakob *-)-+--+       |   mu_auth_t     *-|---+   |   file     |
  ----------  |          |-------------------|   |   |   ...      |
 (  jeff  *-)-+          |   mu_stream_t     |   |   +------------+
  ----------  |          |-------------------|   |
 (  shaleh*-)-+          |   .....           |   |    mu_auth_t
  ----------             |-------------------|   +-->+-------------+
                     +---|-* mu_mailbox_t[]  |       | mu_ticket_t |
  mu_mailbox_t       |   +-------------------+       +-------------+
 +-------------------+
 |   mu_locker_t  *--|-------------+
 |-------------------|             |
 |   mu_url_t        |             |          mu_locker_t
 |-------------------|             +-------->+---------+
 |   mu_stream_t     |                       | lock    |
 |-------------------|                       | unlock  |
 |  mu_message_t[] *-|-------+               +---------+
 +-------------------+       |                     mu_envelope_t
                             |          +-------->+-----------+
  mu_message_t               |          |         | date      |
 +-------------------+<------+          |         | from      |
 |   mu_envelope_t *-|------------------+         | to        |
 |-------------------|              mu_header_t   +-----------+
 |   mu_header_t   *-|------------>+-----------------+
 |-------------------|             |   mu_stream_t   |
 |   mu_body_t     *-|----+        +-----------------+
 +-------------------+    |    mu_body_t
                          +-->+-----------------+
                              |   mu_stream_t   |
                              +-----------------+
@end group
@end smallexample

As an example, here is a simplified version of @code{from} command. It
lists the @samp{From} and @samp{Subject} headers of every mail in a mailbox.

@smallexample
@include sfrom.inc
@end smallexample

Here is a sample output produced by this program:

@smallexample
@cartouche
% ./sfrom pop://alain@@localhost
Passwd: xxxx
Jim Meyering <meyering@@foo.org>      fetish(shellutils) beta
Fran@,{c}ois Pinard <pinard@@bar.org> recode new alpha
@dots{}
@end cartouche
@end smallexample

@node Folder
@subsection Folder
@cindex Folder
@include folder.texi

@node Mailbox
@subsection Mailbox
@cindex Mailbox
@include mailbox.texi

@node Mailer
@subsection Mailer
@cindex Mailer
@include mailer.texi

@node Message
@subsection Message
@cindex Message
@include message.texi

@node Envelope
@subsection Envelope
@cindex Envelope
@include envelope.texi

@node Headers
@subsection Headers
@cindex Headers
@include headers.texi

@node Body
@subsection Body
@cindex Body
@include body.texi

@node Attribute
@subsection Attribute
@cindex Attribute
@include attribute.texi

@node Stream
@subsection Stream
@cindex Stream
@include stream.texi

@node Iterator
@subsection Iterator
@cindex Iterator
@include iterator.texi

@node Authenticator
@subsection Authenticator
@cindex Authenticator
@include auth.texi

@node Address
@subsection Address
@cindex Address
@include address.texi

@node Locker
@subsection Locker
@cindex Locker
@include locker.texi

@node URL
@subsection URL
@cindex URL
@include url.texi

@node Parse822
@subsection Parse822
@include parse822.texi

@node Mailcap
@subsection Mailcap
@include mailcap.texi
