\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename mailutils.info
@settitle GNU Mailutils Manual
@setchapternewpage odd
@finalout
@c %**end of header

@include version.texi
@include macros.texi
@include rendition.texi

@c Define indices
@defcodeindex op
@defcodeindex fl
@c Same as ky, but used for configuration keywords.
@defcodeindex kw

@c Combine indices.
@syncodeindex op fn
@syncodeindex tp fn
@syncodeindex fl cp
@c FIXME: Should kw be separate?
@syncodeindex kw ky

@ifinfo
@dircategory Email
@direntry
* Mailutils: (mailutils).       GNU Mail Utilities.
@end direntry
@dircategory Individual utilities
@direntry
* comsatd: (mailutils)comsatd.          Comsat Daemon.
* frm: (mailutils)frm.                  List Headers from a Mailbox.
* guimb: (mailutils)guimb.              Mailbox Processing Language.
* imap4d: (mailutils)imap4d.            IMAP4 Daemon.
* mail: (mailutils)mail.                Send and Receive Mail.
* maidag: (mailutils)maidag.            A General-Purpose Mail Delivery Agent.
* messages: (mailutils)messages.        Count Messages in a Mailbox.
* pop3d: (mailutils)pop3d.              POP3 Daemon.
* readmsg: (mailutils)readmsg.          Extract Messages from a Folder.
* sieve: (mailutils)sieve.              Mail Filtering Utility.
* mimeview: (mailutils)mimeview.        View MIME Messages.
* mailutils-config: (mailutils)mailutils-config. List Information about Mailutils.
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@copying
Published by the Free Software Foundation,
51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor
Boston, MA 02110-1301, USA

Copyright @copyright{} 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2008, 2009,
2010 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover texts being ``A GNU Manual'',
and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below. A copy of the license
is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation License''.

(a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have freedom to copy and modify
this GNU Manual, like GNU software. Copies published by the Free
Software Foundation raise funds for GNU development.''
@end copying

@titlepage
@title GNU Mailutils
@subtitle version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}
@author Alain Magloire, Sergey Poznyakoff et al.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@page
@summarycontents
@page
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top GNU Mailutils

This edition of the @cite{GNU Mailutils Manual}, last updated on
@value{UPDATED}, documents GNU Mailutils Version @value{VERSION}.
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::            Preliminary Information.
* Programs::                Mailutils Programs.
* Libraries::               Mailutils Libraries.
* Sieve Language::          The Sieve Language.
* Reporting Bugs::          How to Report a Bug.
* News::                    Getting News About GNU Mailutils.
* Acknowledgement::         Thanks and Credits.

Appendices

* References::              References.
* Date Input Formats::
* Usage Vars::              Configuring Help Summary
* GNU FDL::                 This manual is under the GNU Free
                            Documentation License.

Indices

* Function Index::          All Mailutils Functions.
* Variable Index::          All Mailutils Variables.
* Keyword Index::           Index of Keywords.
* Program Index::           All Mailutils Programs.
* Concept Index::           Index of Concepts.

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Introduction

* Book Contents::               What this Book Contains
* History::                     A bit of History

Mailutils Programs

* command line::      Command Line Syntax.  
* configuration::     Common Configuration File.

* frm and from::      List Headers from a Mailbox.
* mail::              Send and Receive Mail.
* messages::          Count the Number of Messages in a Mailbox.
* movemail::          Moves Mail from the User Maildrop to the Local File.
* readmsg::           Extract Messages from a Folder.

* sieve::             Mail Filtering Utility.
* guimb::             Mailbox Scanning and Processing Language.

* maidag::            General-purpose Mail Delivery Agent.

* mimeview::          Universal File Viewer.

* pop3d::             POP3 Daemon.
* imap4d::            IMAP4 Daemon.
* comsatd::           Comsat Daemon.

* mh::                The MH Message Handling System.

* mailutils-config::  Get the Information about the Mailutils Build.

Command Line

* Option Basics::       Basic Notions About Command Line Options.
* Common Options::      Options That are Common for All Utilities.

Mailutils Configuration File

* conf-syntax::         Configuration File Syntax
* Include::             Include Statement
* Logging Statement::
* Debug Statement::
* Mailbox Statement::
* Locking Statement::
* Mailer Statement::
* ACL Statement::
* Tcp-wrappers Statement::
* Server Settings::
* Auth Statement::
* PAM Statement::
* Virtdomain Statement::
* Radius Statement::
* SQL Statement::
* LDAP Statement::
* TLS Statement::
* GSASL Statement::

Configuration File Syntax

* Comments::
* Statements::
* Block Statements::

Server Settings

* General Server Configuration::
* Server Statement::

@command{mail} --- Send and Receive Mail

* Invoking Mail::            Command Line Options.
* Specifying Messages::      How to Specify Message Sets.
* Composing Mail::           Composing Mail.
* Reading Mail::             Reading Mail.
* Scripting::                Scripting.
* Mail Variables::           How to Alter the Behavior of @command{mail}.
* Mail Configuration Files:: Personal and System-wide Configuration Files.

Composing Mail

* Quitting Compose Mode::
* Getting Help on Compose Escapes::
* Editing the Message::
* Modifying the Headers::
* Enclosing Another Message::
* Adding a File to the Message::
* Printing And Saving the Message::
* Signing the Message::
* Printing Another Message::
* Inserting Value of a Mail Variable::
* Executing Other Mail Commands::
* Executing Shell Commands::

Reading Mail

* Quitting the Program::
* Obtaining Online Help::
* Moving Within a Mailbox::
* Changing mailbox/directory::
* Controlling Header Display::
* Displaying Information::
* Displaying Messages::
* Marking Messages::
* Disposing of Messages::
* Saving Messages::
* Editing Messages::
* Aliasing::
* Replying::
* Controlling Sender Fields::
* Incorporating New Mail::
* Shell Escapes::

@command{movemail} --- Moves Mail from the User Maildrop to the Local File

* Movemail Configuration::
* Movemail Options::     Description of the Available Options
* Summary::              Short Movemail Invocation Summary

@command{readmsg} --- Extract Messages from a Folder

* Opt-readmsg::   Invocation of @command{readmsg}.
* Conf-readmsg::  Configuration of @command{readmsg}.

@command{sieve}

* sieve interpreter::   A Sieve Interpreter
* sieve.scm::           A Sieve to Scheme Translator and Filter

A Sieve Interpreter

* Invoking Sieve::
* Sieve Configuration::
* Logging and Debugging::
* Extending Sieve::

@command{guimb} --- A Mailbox Scanning and Processing Language

* Specifying Scheme Program to Execute::
* Specifying Mailboxes to Operate Upon::
* Passing Options to Scheme::
* Command Line Option Summary::

maidag

* Sendmail-maidag::          Using @command{maidag} with Sendmail.
* Exim-maidag::             Using @command{maidag} with Exim.
* MeTA1-maidag::            Using @command{maidag} with MeTA1.
* Mailbox Quotas::
* Maidag Scripting::
* Forwarding::
* Url-mode::                Delivering Messages to a URL.
* Remote Mailbox Delivery::
* Conf-maidag::             Maidag Configuration File Summary

Mailbox Quotas

* DBM Quotas::          Keeping Quotas in DBM File.
* SQL Quotas::          Keeping Quotas in SQL Database.

Maidag Scripting

* Sieve Maidag Filters::
* Scheme Maidag Filters::

mimeview

* Mimeview Invocation::
* Mimeview Config::

POP3 Daemon

* Login delay::
* Auto-expire::
* Bulletins::
* Conf-pop3d::           Pop3d Configuration
* Command line options::

IMAP4 Daemon

* Namespace::       Namespace.
* Conf-imap4d::     Configuration.
* Starting imap4d:: Invocation Options.

Comsat Daemon

* Starting comsatd::       Invocation.
* Configuring comsatd::    Configuration of @command{comsatd}.
* dot.biffrc::             A per-user configuration file.

Configuring @command{comsatd}

* General Settings::
* Security Settings::

@acronym{MH} --- The MH Message Handling System

* Diffs::      Major differences between Mailutils MH and other MH
               implementations.

Major differences between Mailutils MH and other MH implementations

* Format String Diffs::
* Profile Variable Diffs::
* Program Diffs::

@command{mailutils-config} --- Get the Information about the Mailutils Build

* Compiler Flags::      Getting Compiler Flags.
* Loader Flags::        Getting Loader Flags.
* General Information:: Obtaining General Build Information.

Mailutils Libraries

* libmailutils::    The Core Library.
* libmu_auth::      Auxiliary Library for Authenticating Users.
* libmu_scm::       Mailutils to Scheme Interface.
* libmu_sieve::     GNU Implementation of Sieve Mail Filtering.

Framework

* Folder::             Folder.
* Mailbox::            Mailbox.
* Mailer::             Protocol Used to Send Mail.
* Message::            Message.
* Envelope::           Envelope.
* Headers::            Headers.
* Body::               Body.
* Attribute::          Attribute.
* Stream::             Stream.
* Iterator::           Iterator.
* Authenticator::      Authenticator.
* Address::            Address.
* Locker::             Locker.
* URL::                Uniform Resource Locators.
* Parse822::           Parsing RFC 822 headers.
* Mailcap::            Parsing RFC 1524 file.

Authentication Library

* Data Types::
* Initializing libmu_auth::
* Module Creation and Destruction::
* Obtaining Authorization Information::
* Existing Modules::
* Using libmu_auth in Your Programs::

Mailutils to Scheme Interface

* Address Functions::
* Mailbox Functions::
* Message Functions::
* MIME Functions::
* Logging Functions::
* Other Functions::

Using @file{libmu_scm}

* Direct Linking::
* Dynamic Linking::

Sieve Library

* Sieve Data Types::
* Manipulating the Sieve Machine::
* Logging and Diagnostic Functions::
* Symbol Space Functions::
* Memory Allocation::
* Compiling and Executing the Script::
* Writing Loadable Commands::

Sieve Language

* Lexical Structure::
* Syntax::
* Preprocessor::
* Require Statement::
* Comparators::
* Tests::
* Actions::
* GNU Extensions::

Syntax

* Commands::
* Actions Described::
* Control Flow::
* Tests and Conditions::

Preprocessor

* #include::        Include the contents of a file.
* #searchpath::     Modify the current search path.

Tests

* Built-in Tests::
* External Tests::

Actions

* Built-in Actions::
* External Actions::

Date Input Formats

* General date syntax::            Common rules.
* Calendar date items::            19 Dec 1994.
* Time of day items::              9:20pm.
* Time zone items::                @sc{est}, @sc{pdt}, @sc{gmt}.
* Day of week items::              Monday and others.
* Relative items in date strings:: next tuesday, 2 years ago.
* Pure numbers in date strings::   19931219, 1440.
* Seconds since the Epoch::        @@1078100502.
* Specifying time zone rules::     TZ="America/New_York", TZ="UTC0".
* Authors of get_date::            Bellovin, Eggert, Salz, Berets, et al.

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

GNU Mailutils is a rich and powerful protocol-independent mail
framework.  It contains a series of useful mail libraries, clients,
and servers.  These are the primary mail utilities for the GNU system.
The central library is capable of handling electronic mail in various
mailbox formats and protocols, both local and remote.  Specifically,
this project contains a POP3 server, an IMAP4 server, and a Sieve mail
filter. It also provides a POSIX `mailx' client, and a collection of
other handy tools.

The GNU Mailutils libraries supply an ample set of primitives for
handling electronic mail in programs written in C, C++, Python or
Scheme.

At the core of Mailutils is libmailutils, a library which provides
universal access to various mailboxes and protocols: UNIX mailbox,
Maildir, MH, POP3, IMAP4, Sendmail, SMTP.  Mailutils offers functions
for almost any mail-related task, such as parsing of messages, email
addresses and URLs, handling MIME messages, listing mail folders,
mailcap facilities, extensible Sieve filtering, access control lists.
It supports various modern data security and authentication
techniques: TLS encryption, SASL and GSSAPI, to name a few.
The framework is able to work with a wide variety of authorization
databases, ranging from traditional system password database up to
RADIUS, SQL and LDAP.

The utilities provided by Mailutils include imap4d and pop3d mail
servers, mail reporting utility comsatd, general-purpose mail delivery
agent maidag, mail filtering program sieve, and an implementation of
MH message handling system.

All utilities share the same subset of command line options and use
a unified configuration mechanism, which allows to easily configure
the package as a whole.

This software is part of the GNU Project and is copyrighted by the
Free Software Foundation.  All libraries are distributed under the
terms of the Lesser GNU Public License.  The documentation is licensed
under the GNU FDL, and everything else is licensed under the GNU GPL.

@menu
* Book Contents::               What this Book Contains
* History::                     A bit of History
@end menu

@node Book Contents
@section What this Book Contains

@FIXME{This is more a plan on how the document should be structured,
than a description of its actual structure. However it is:}

  This book addresses a wide audience of both system administrators
and users that aim to use Mailutils programs, and programmers who wish
to use Mailutils libraries in their programs. Given this audience,
the book is divided in three major parts.

  The first part provides a detailed description of each Mailutils
utility, and advices on how to use them in various situations. This
part is intended for users and system administrators who are using
Mailutils programs. If you are not interested in programming using
Mailutils, this is the only part you need to read.

  Subsequent parts address programmers.

  The second part is a tutorial which provides an introduction to
programming techniques for writing mail applications using GNU
Mailutils.

  Finally, the third part contains a complete Mailutils library
reference. 

  This version of the book is not finished. The places that may
contain inaccurate information carry prominent notices stating so.
For updated versions of the documentation, visit
@uref{http://www.gnu.org/software/mailutils/manual}. If you have any
questions, feel free to ask them at the mailing list
@email{bug-mailutils@@gnu.org}. 

@node History
@section A bit of History, and why use this package?
@UNREVISED

This package started off to try and handle large mailbox files more
gracefully then current POP3 servers did. While it handles this task,
it also allows you to support a variety of different mailbox formats
without any real effort on your part. Also, if a new format is added
at a later date, your program will support that new format
automatically as soon as it is compiled against the new library.

@node Programs
@chapter Mailutils Programs
@cindex Programs
@include programs.texi

@node Libraries
@chapter Mailutils Libraries
@cindex Libraries

@menu
* libmailutils::    The Core Library.
* libmu_auth::      Auxiliary Library for Authenticating Users.
* libmu_scm::       Mailutils to Scheme Interface.
* libmu_sieve::     GNU Implementation of Sieve Mail Filtering.
@end menu

@node libmailutils
@section Framework
@cindex Framework
@include framework.texi

@node libmu_auth
@section Authentication Library
@cindex Authentication Library
@cindex libmu_auth
@include libmu_auth.texi

@node libmu_scm
@section Mailutils to Scheme Interface
@cindex Scheme
@cindex libmu_scm
@include libmu_scm.texi

@node libmu_sieve
@section Sieve Library
@cindex Sieve Library
@cindex libmu_sieve
@include libmu_sieve.texi

@node Sieve Language
@chapter Sieve Language
@cindex Sieve Language
@include sieve.texi

@node Reporting Bugs
@chapter Reporting Bugs

Email bug reports to @email{bug-mailutils@@gnu.org}.

As the purpose of bug reporting is to improve software, please be sure
to include maximum information when reporting a bug. The information
needed is:

@itemize
@item Version of the package you are using.
@item Compilation options used when configuring the package.
@item Conditions under which the bug appears.
@end itemize

The archives of bug-mailutils mailing list are available from
@url{http://mail.gnu.org/@/mailman/@/listinfo/@/bug-mailutils}.

@node News
@chapter Getting News About GNU Mailutils

The two places to look for any news regarding GNU Mailutils are the
Mailutils homepage at @url{http://www.gnu.org/@/software/@/mailutils}, and the
project page at @url{http://savannah.gnu.org/@/projects/@/mailutils}.

The updated versions of this manual are available online from
@url{http://www.gnu.org/@/software/@/mailutils/@/manual}.

@node Acknowledgement
@chapter Acknowledgement

In no particular order,

@itemize @bullet
@item
Jakob Kaivo @email{jkaivo@@ndn.net},
@item
Jeff Bailey @email{jbailey@@gnu.org},
@item
Sean Perry @email{shaleh@@debian.org},
@item
Thomas Fletcher @email{thomasf@@qnx.com},
@item
Dave Inglis @email{dinglis@@qnx.com},
@item
Brian Edmond @email{briane@@qnx.com},
@item
Sam Roberts @email{sroberts@@uniserve.com},
@item
Sergey Poznyakoff @email{gray@@Mirddin.farlep.net},
@item
Fran@,{c}ois Pinard  @email{pinard@@IRO.UMontreal.CA}.
@item
Jordi Mallach @email{jordi@@sindominio.net}
@item
Wojciech Polak @email{polak@@gnu.org}
@end itemize

@node References
@appendix References

@itemize @bullet
@item SMTP

@itemize @minus
@item
@cite{RFC 2821: Simple Mail Transfer Protocol}

@item
@cite{RFC 2368: The mailto URL scheme}

@item
@cite{RFC 2487: SMTP Service Extension for Secure SMTP over TLS}
@end itemize

@item POP3

@itemize @minus
@item
@cite{RFC 1939: Post Office Protocol - Version 3}

@item
@cite{RFC 1734: POP3 AUTHentication command}

@item
@cite{RFC 1957: Some Observations on Implementations of the Post Office
Protocol (POP3)}

@item
@cite{RFC 2449: POP3 Extension Mechanism}

@item
@cite{RFC 2384: POP URL Scheme}

@item
@cite{RFC 2595: Using TLS with IMAP, POP3 and ACAP}
@end itemize

@item IMAP4

@itemize @minus
@item
@cite{RFC 2060: INTERNET MESSAGE ACCESS PROTOCOL - VERSION 4rev1}

@item
@cite{RFC 2088: IMAP4 non-synchronizing literals}

@item
@cite{RFC 2193: IMAP4 Mailbox Referrals}

@item
@cite{RFC 2221: IMAP4 Login Referrals}

@item
@cite{RFC 2342: IMAP4 Namespace}

@item
@cite{RFC 2192: IMAP URL Scheme}

@item
@cite{RFC 1731: IMAP4 Authentication Mechanisms}

@item
@cite{RFC 2245: Anonymous SASL Mechanism}

@item
@cite{RFC 2595: Using TLS with IMAP, POP3 and ACAP}
@end itemize

@item message formats

@itemize @minus
@item
@cite{RFC 2822: Internet Message Format}

@item
@cite{RFC 2045: Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME) Part One:
Format of Internet Message Bodies}

@item
@cite{RFC 2046: Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME) Part Two:
Media Types}

@item
@cite{RFC 2047: Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME) Part Three:
Message Header Extensions for Non-ASCII Text}

@item
@cite{RFC 2049: Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME) Part Five:
Conformance Criteria and Examples}

@item
@cite{RFC 2111: Content-ID and Message-ID Uniform Resource Locators}
@end itemize

@item miscellaneous related topics

@itemize @minus
@item
@cite{RFC 1738: Uniform Resource Locators (URL)}

@item
@cite{RFC 2298: An Extensible Message Format for Message Disposition
Notifications}

@item
@cite{RFC 3028: Sieve: A Mail Filtering Language}

@item
@cite{RFC 3431: Sieve Extension: Relational Tests}

@item
@cite{Internet Email Protocols: A Developer's Guide, by Kevin Johnson}
@end itemize
@end itemize

@node Date Input Formats
@appendix Date Input Formats
@include getdate.texi

@include usage.texi

@include fdl.texi

@node Function Index
@unnumbered Function Index

This is an alphabetical list of all Mailutils functions.

@printindex fn
@page

@node Variable Index
@unnumbered Variable Index
@printindex vr
@page

@node Keyword Index
@unnumbered Keyword Index
@printindex ky
@page

@node Program Index
@unnumbered Program Index

@printindex pg
@page

@node Concept Index
@unnumbered Concept Index

This is a general index of all issues discussed in this manual

@printindex cp

@bye
