@c snarfed from "mu_mailbox.c":110
@deffn {Scheme procedure} mu-mail-directory url
If @var{url} is given, sets it as a name of the user's mail directory.
Returns the current value of the mail directory.
@end deffn

@c snarfed from "mu_mailbox.c":125
@deffn {Scheme procedure} mu-folder-directory url
If @var{url} is given, sets it as a name of the user's folder directory.
Returns the current value of the folder directory.
@end deffn

@c snarfed from "mu_mailbox.c":149
@deffn {Scheme procedure} mu-mailbox-open url mode
Opens the mailbox specified by @var{url}. @var{mode} is a string, consisting of
the characters described below, giving the access mode for the mailbox

@multitable @columnfractions 0.20 0.70
@headitem @var{mode} @tab Meaning
@item r @tab Open for reading.
@item w @tab Open for writing.
@item a @tab Open for appending to the end of the mailbox.
@item c @tab Create the mailbox if it does not exist.
@end multitable

@end deffn

@c snarfed from "mu_mailbox.c":201
@deffn {Scheme procedure} mu-mailbox-close mbox
Closes mailbox @var{mbox}.
@end deffn

@c snarfed from "mu_mailbox.c":216
@deffn {Scheme procedure} mu-mailbox-get-url mbox
Returns url of the mailbox @var{mbox}.
@end deffn

@c snarfed from "mu_mailbox.c":240
@deffn {Scheme procedure} mu-mailbox-get-port mbox mode
Returns a port associated with the contents of the @var{mbox}.
@var{mode} is a string defining operation mode of the stream. It may
contain any of the two characters: @samp{r} for reading, @samp{w} for
writing.

@end deffn

@c snarfed from "mu_mailbox.c":262
@deffn {Scheme procedure} mu-mailbox-get-message mbox msgno
Retrieve from message #@var{msgno} from the mailbox @var{mbox}.
@end deffn

@c snarfed from "mu_mailbox.c":288
@deffn {Scheme procedure} mu-mailbox-messages-count mbox
Returns number of messages in the mailbox @var{mbox}.
@end deffn

@c snarfed from "mu_mailbox.c":309
@deffn {Scheme procedure} mu-mailbox-expunge mbox
Expunges deleted messages from the mailbox @var{mbox}.
@end deffn

@c snarfed from "mu_mailbox.c":328
@deffn {Scheme procedure} mu-mailbox-append-message mbox mesg
Appends message @var{mesg} to the mailbox @var{mbox}.
@end deffn

